# Solent E-Library
Created by Jeykan Alaz – Student ID: Q12966932 
### Github Link
https://github.com/JayAlaz/SWD600.git
## Introduction and Project Background
Technology in society is evolving with each passing day and in many different fields; mobile phones have upgraded into smartphones; whiteboards are essentially becoming non-existent and are being replaced by smartboards; and most schools library catalogues are now very easy to access online. This has graced university students and scholars with new and more efficient means of research and innovative ways of learning through finding scholarly articles on academic databases or watching recorded lectures videos or tutorials. Books have been used by humans for centuries and have always been considered a valuable resource, especially with regards to learning and recording knowledge. Over thousands of books have been published on fictional, recreational, and academic topics. The problem that most students are having to face today regarding paperback literature is finding a singular book amongst a shelf of hundreds.
The Solent E-Library has a very user-friendly appearance that is bright, clear, concise, and keeping in with the university’s colour theme of red and white. Implementing this app with a minimalistic design style in mind allowed for the application to not distract from the main purpose of finding and interacting with the books supplied at Solent in an easy and stress-free manner. Implementing an online library such as this not only benefits the students by ultimately making books more readily available, but it also eliminates the problem of running out of copies of a specific book. In addition to that, it can also be very beneficial to the institution hosting such an app, as this can ultimately save costs by slowly eliminating the need for multiple physical copies of books. 
## Problem Statement
How can library resources be made to be more easily accessible and tempting to students?
## App Description
Accessing the online library will not require any registration or sign-in process, as this app would hypothetically be an extension of the Solent Portal, meaning that students would have already been signed in via the Portal. Upon opening the app, users will be greeted by the homepage; welcoming them to the Solent E-Library, this page is minimalistic, displaying little more than an image of the Mountbatten Library, and the navigation bar, this is to not distract the user from the main features of the application and to keep the page looking clean and concise.  The “Books” tab of the application will list an assortment of books available for viewing at the user’s request, and each book would potentially be accessed using the “Request Book” button. The user will be able to add chosen books to their favourites using the “Add to Favourites” star icon, which in response will cause them to appear in the "Favourites" tab – This can be very helpful for keeping track of certain books and highlighting the books that are liked by the end user. If a book is no longer to the users liking, or they no longer have need of it, it can easily be removed from the favourites tab by clicking the star icon of the book you wish to remove in the favourites tab, in which doing so should result in an “Unfavourited!” message appearing near the star icon. An "About Us" tab has also been included to display the service times of the Mountbatten Library, and to elaborate on what the general purpose of the application is. 
## Methodology
The development methodology that I have used to manage this project was an adaptation of the Pomodoro technique, with certain elements borrowed from the Design Thinking methodology. Summarily, this allowed for me to split up the tasks that needed to be completed, into a varying number of pomodoro’s; the number of pomodoro’s needed for each task would be dependent on the complexity and time-consuming nature of each individual task. The traditional Pomodoro technique is the act of engaging in a task for twenty-five minutes with no interruptions or diversions from the task, if this were to occur then the timer would have to be reset, this is then to be followed by a five-minute break - this cycle is equivalent to one Pomodoro. I adapted this technique to my work style by increasing the twenty-five minutes of engagement time to forty minutes, which would then be followed by a ten-minute break instead of the traditional five-minute break. In order to better visualise the goals, I was trying to accomplish, I created a something similar looking to a score board to keep track of how many pomodoro sequences I completed that day for each task. This allowed me to better divide my time so that none of the tasks were neglected, and helped in ensuring a continuous, non-stressful workflow. Each pomodoro that has been completed is symbolised by a red dot.
I also followed some of the characteristics of the Design Thinking style of methodology to the degree of taking the thought process of focusing more on the end users that the product in question is being designed for and what they hope to gain from using this product, this is also said to reduce the overall risk involved with misinterpreting the specifications as there is a clearer understanding and more concise communication between the consumers and developers. To summarise, Design Thinking is the methodology that will manage how I undertake the tasks of gathering data through researching academia and performing data collection such as interviews and user testing, whereas the pomodoro technique will promote positive time-management and a steady workflow when designing and developing the application.
I opted for a merge of Design Thinking and the Pomodoro Technique, as it compliments my personal style of conducting projects with the end users in mind, and in a non-stressful and steady-paced manner; whilst eliminating the factor of having to scale down elements of these methodologies in response to this being a smaller project like one would have to do with Waterfall and even Agile development methods. Certain qualities of the Design Thinking methodology such as employing an empathic thinking process helped greatly in other portions of this project, such as in conducting data collection, whilst implementing the Pomodoro Technique and score board helped more with managing the actual design, development, and testing of the application itself by upkeeping the workflow and helping with time-management, this took place during the Prototype and Test stages of the Design Thinking methodology.
## Methods & Results
The data collection process had been conducted around the start of this project, during the Empathise stage mentioned in the Design Thinking methodology. Data collection tools such as oral telephone interviews, online surveys and zoom calls were previously carried out as a socially distant, safe, yet effective way to perform data collection and understand from what aspects certain students at Solent University felt that they were underserved and implement a solution to rectify this.
To begin the data collection, I began with an informal telephone interview; the subject of this interview was a final year undergraduate student attending Solent University. This was in short, an insightful interview that bought to light the struggles that some students who are not equipped with a personal laptop or computer face. This student uses their phone for all online related activities unless they have access to a computer at the library. They have mentioned that they would like a more concise and clean form of mobile adaption of the library services as they have many issues with the visibility of certain links and difficulty with navigating the website. The second subject was a master’s student in Creative Direction for Fashion and Beauty, from Solent University, the initial mode of communication was to be a Zoom call but due to poor wi-fi on my behalf, a telephone interview was settled for. This student believes the website is unnecessarily tedious to navigate using a mobile device, but has little trouble navigating on a computer. That being said, they stated they would like for more search refinement options, such as selecting books relevant only to a certain course. Despite the data collection not being conducted on a larger scale, actual interaction between myself and the subject through means of meeting, audio, or video call, were a lot more genuine and insightful than it would have been had a survey or questionnaire been used instead, I believe this led to gathering more data from each individual sample and gauging emotional responses more in this way. Very small-scale user testing was carried out on the three members of my household as the file size of this project was too large to send over e-mail, and GitHub proved to be a challenging means of showcasing my work as I was constantly making changes to it until the last minute. Two members of the user testing sample are undergraduate students at Arden University studying business. Responses from the sample proved to be useful and allowed me to make some welcome modifications to the app. The initial background set for the app was replaced by a plain white brick layout and the image used in the original background was replaced by an image of Mountbatten library set as centre image on the homepage. This definitely cleaned the application up and added a much-needed tidiness. The mobile view of the application was also tested and despite certain elements not fitting precisely, the main features of the app that end users will be interacting with were responsive. Upon implementing these changes, another user testing session was conducted with a single subject from the previous sample; this subject commended the app for how it has presented the books and its minimalistic design. As a result of Covid-19 pandemic and the lockdown measures put into place, physical interaction between people is almost non-existent and many activities from schooling to working is now taking place at home via the internet. This has made people extremely dependant on the resources available online, it is for this reason that I have worked towards implementing a solution that is easy to navigate, simple and minimalistic, to ensure that usability is easy for all the end users.  
## Conclusion
In conclusion, students previously claimed that they feel that Solent University’s online library resources are not up to standard in comparison to most universities, and that the mobile adaption of these features are poor. The initial report written out for the Solent E-Library application proposed that all the features of the library were to be implemented into the app. This consisted of a bright, clear, and concise layout with features such as the libraries opening and closing times, notifications to let students know on what nights the library will be open for twenty-four hours, live chat services, e-books, library catalogues, and the function allowing users to book group or individual study rooms. It would be extremely useful to have all these features housed in one, easy to use application. Despite the optimism for a full mobile friendly adaptation of the library’s online services – implementation of all these features proved to be too challenging due to the poor quality of my laptop at home and the restrictions of the pandemic that negated me from making use of the high-quality computers at Mountbatten library. As a result of this, the end result of the application is currently showcasing only a few of the features mentioned above, such as the service hours of Mountbatten library, as well as an assortment of e-books and the option to favourite them.
